[3/3/26 5:49 PM] Chris Allen: I think I get why you were getting away with exporting chkjams before, the state jam import operation attempts ExportedStateJam first, then falls back to a state-only import that knows how to skip to the state axis (6, I think) in the kernel noun (a checkpoint jam is effectively a jam-format serialization of the entirety of the kernel including the code (batteries/cores/etc.)
[3/3/26 6:12 PM] Chris Allen: There's multiple options for how to proceed from here with different trade-offs, I figured I'd suggest/mention a few as long as everyone understands that I have to wrap this up to move on to other tasks so I might have to cut bait before hitting stretch goals. There will be a way to export and import chain state regardless.

The lowest effort way to do it is to basically keep the same mechanisms with minimal modifications, this has some strengths beyond "lowest effort." One is that the jam format means it works for _any_ NockApp's state, not just nockchain. It's possible/thinkable to also offer a non-jam format but there's more to the kernel state than just what the native types cover in stuff like the gRPC block cache. One example I'm directly familiar with from working on peek efficiency is secondary indexes and map structures built into the kernel state. There are other ancillary loci of state in the kernel that I'm less familiar with. The problem with a non-jam format or representation is a fully correct/sound implementation would likely turn into event log replay.

There are multiple reasons checkpointing has to go away as the automatic backup/snapshotting mechanism for PMA. And there are multiple reasons we need snapshotting for bootstrapping event log replay for recovering corrupt PMA slabs.

- Checkpointing is extremely difficult to optimize because jamming a large noun is computationally intensive.

- Generating a checkpoint jam of the entire chain state as quickly as possible imposes a significant peak RSS burden as well and basically doubles peak RSS from 18 GiB to ~35 GiB. That's _after_ some optimizations I made to bring it down from a 3x.

- It's not really tractable to get it down from 2-3x without full incremental streaming which I _did_ implement some not insignificant pain in the bump PMA branch on the GitHub. The problem is that doing so wiped out all of the throughput/time gains I made with chaff. Chaff made jam/cue faster for huge nouns (basically, a fully loaded nockchain peer) by about 7x. Layering the streaming checkpoint implementation onto chaff then made it ~7x slower again. There are some tweaks and optimizations I can attempt here 

- Checkpointing being slow isn't just an inconvenience/extra background CPU time wasted, it compromises its fitness for purpose as a means of securing durability w/ minimal state loss. It was never perfect for this but the non-chaff and streaming + chaff implementations both take the same amount of time in my testing with a 50k+ peer: 200-235 seconds. chaff w/o streaming usually takes ~35 seconds and if in a non-PMA context it isn't achieving that I'd like to know. Losing the last 200-235 seconds of state updates should rarely matter for a sleepy/caught up peer, is annoying but not fatal for a new or fallen behind peer trying to catch up, and not really tolerable at all for other arbitrary NockApps that might not have a secondary source of truth that they can rely on for catch-up.

- A straightforward/naive implementation of checkpointing with PMA has the problem that is defeats the entire design/idea behind PMA as a means of sparing peak RSS: it re-hots all of the pages in the PMA because it by definition is reading/copying all of the state at once. I mention the pains I went to in the streaming checkpointer in part because some of that had to do with overriding/side-stepping the virtual memory subsystem so that it read the data from disk
[3/3/26 6:12 PM] Chris Allen: - A streaming checkpoint implementation, even if we made it fast enough, has another problem. Reading the PMA slab from disk directly (no VM pages or in-memory copy) isn't sound from a data integrity POV unless we stop the Serf for the entirety of the checkpointing process. We were able to change it to a mostly async/background thing before _because_ we were copying the whole subject to a NounSlab which is responsible for part of the severe RSS peak impact. The other part is having to store the whole jam in-memory during construction which I also avoided in the streaming checkpointer.  Even if I got the streaming checkpointer down to 35 seconds without peaking RSS again (which I think is impossible for multiple reasons) you're still "stopping the world" for 35 seconds at an interval whose trade-off is in direct tension with how strong your durability story is.

- Stretch goal: I'd like to support a means of doing "live export" of checkpoints/state jams from a peer that don't require taking it down. Taking it down temporarily, especially if it isn't be using for gRPC access to block information by another service, isn't problematic in the context of nockchain but it's more problematic for something like a NockApp that serves a direct functional purpose that includes state it has exclusive access to. Related to this, I've been thinking about patterns for making it easier to implement chain-like distributed state in custom NockApps.
[3/3/26 7:00 PM] Chris Allen: Rough sketch of what I think could make sense.

- Re-use the same low-level filesystem APIs that we adopt for copying the active/live PMA slab as a snapshot to copy the latest snapshot during Serf downtime _plus the event log_ to a staging area for state export

- Run a batch utility either on the same server or on a different server (to spare memory impact on the live peer or non-nockchain NockApp instance, possibly) for loading the snapshot, replaying the event log _since that snapshot_ to catch up the kernel state, and then generate and persist to disk a state jam (not chkjam)

- One to do way to do this in the "batch export" utility is to boot nockvm with the staged snapshot as the "current" PMA slab and replay the staged event log pokes, then export the state jam from the kernel's state axis. The most straightforward version of this has the RSS doubling problem but that straightforward version is also the fastest implementation. It's possible that someone interested in a streaming version of this could extricate the streaming checkpoint work I did from the current bump PMA branch. I would expect the streaming version to be significantly slower even after low-hanging optimization fruit is picked but I can imagine why people would want that.

- Another approach is to choose to eat the PMA page re-hotting + stop the world time and do a "live" export from the peer itself by submitting an export request and having it pause after the next event is finished to generate the state jam. Even if you manage to avoid an OOM kill (which interrupts checkpoint export and corrupts the result if you were in the middle of streaming or batch-writing it to disk), you're eating some unpredictability in both RSS max and in block processing throughput because you'll be cycling through page fault bursts during and after checkpointing due to virtual memory pressure. 

- Sidebar: I do not have a story for why anyone would want a checkpoint jam specifically and not a state jam.

- I'll mention it just in case someone thinks they have a clever idea later: do _not_ _ever_ ingest/import/load a PMA snapshot from a third party. Making that safe (I'm talking security here, not just data integrity) would take a lot of code and compute effort that would defeat the reasons you'd have for wanting to do this. I do not want to be party to any effort to do this.
[3/3/26 7:11 PM] Chris Allen: Final desideratum: I don't know if it's everyone at Zorp's preference, but it's my preference for chain integrity and cybersecurity reasons that people get away from using chain state bootstraps from third-party individuals.

I've been working hard on block processing throughput and proof verification efficiency so that we can get to a point where it's less frequently necessary/urgent. Being frank, if you're starting a nockchain peer for the first time and don't already have one online that you can steal a snapshot from, why are you importing a snapshot from someone else? If it's your first-ever peer why do you have a burning need to be caught up to tip immediately? I know people don't like waiting but lets consider the reasons people have for starting up a peer:

- For kicks or to support the chain.  You don't need a third-party bootstrap, let it sync from genesis.
- To experiment as a developer, play with the gRPC APIs, etc. You don't need a third-party bootstrap, let it sync from genesis.
- You want to start mining immediately. You don't want to mine with the an unmodified nockchain instance, use one of the pools like Nockpool or Nockbox. You don't need a peer at all because you're going to use an optimized mining pool client. If you must have a non-mining peer: you don't need a third-party bootstrap, let it sync from genesis.

If you need a peer that is caught up immediately for a production/business need, you have other peers, if not multiple, that you control. You can safely grab a snapshot from a computer you own/control.

I know people won't stop doing this just because I have concerns about the risks. It's also adding design and implementation effort time to the PMA work that would otherwise be spent finishing/optimizing/validating the PMA branch.

I think the third party bootstraps were more necessary when the peering protocol was noisier, less efficient, and less reliable but AFAIK everything's been peachy for awhile now and it's basically just down to the time it requires to catch up to chain tip.
[3/3/26 7:17 PM] Chris Allen: re: making syncing (even from genesis or just lagged peer catch-up) faster:

Some of that optimization work I've been doing is already released, cf. the gor-tip/mor-tip jetting I did that we released recently. That cut the poke time for block 51095 (an exceptionally heavy block) down from ~130 seconds to ~36.2 seconds. Of the ~36.2 seconds in the optimized version, ~19.6 seconds was tip5 hashing which is close to the speed-of-light limit for how fast that work can be done with my memoization in the jets.

Some is still pending:

- native peek handlers that don't use nockvm at all and read directly from the kernel subject in Rust. I have this implemented for the heaviest chain block range peek in a branch, it made grabbing a batch of blocks ~50x faster. It yields the exact same Noun as the original peek handler.

- The provisional specification of the upcoming network protocol upgrade should go out soon as a PR on the GitHub repo. Part of that spec will be syncing batches of blocks between peers. Most of my block processing time / peek time optimization work was with an eye toward making batch sync not over-burden either the receiving or sending peer. gor-tip/mor-tip jetting eases the burden for the receiving peer poking the block in and native peeks eases the burden for the sending peer yielding the batch of blocks as a peer response.
